# Introduction to Networking | Networking Fundamentals Part 1 

For you at work or home you have a bunch of devices computers, printers, TVs and so on, you 

connect these by means of a network. When the devices are connected they're able to share data

this could be a sending a print job to a printer, sending an email or streaming a video can also 

be used for sharing an internet connection. Mostly network users are unaware of the network they're

using as long as they can browse the Internet do their job, browse YouTube, they're usually fine for

all of these devices to communicate, they need to be connected together somehow one way sir plug 

cables into the devices and connect them to another device called a switch an example is in a

school's computer in this case a computer in the lab connects to a wall socket with a cable, 

another cable runs through the wall which comes out at a patch panel, this may be a cabinet on the 

wall somewhere in the room or in another room entirely, the port on the patch panel then connects 

to the switch. You might have a switch at a home, too most homes don't have wall sockets 

so devices are connected directly to the switch,  we'll talk more about how switches work. 

Later we can also connect devices wirelessly a common way, to do this is to use a wireless access

point, a wireless network like this is also called Wi-Fi, an example of this is if you have a 

tablet, it is impractical to cable it in, so wireless is a good option. 

**The access point** is like a switch without cables, more than one device can connect to the 

access point over time but without the messy cabling. The access point can also be connected

to the switch with a cable, this way wired and wireless devices can be part of the same network. 

Having both wired switches and wires access points gives you more connection options. Imagine

you have a laptop in an office you may connect it to the network with a cable when you're 

at your desk, when you have a meeting in the conference room, you remove the cable and connect to 

Wi-Fi where the wired or wireless the goal of the network is to move information from one device

to another. For this to work, the sender and the receiver must understand each other, they need

to speak the same language. 

In the network, speaking the same language means that devices agree on how data is sent, received, 

organized and handled basically they agree on a process that they all follow, it's a bit like filling

out a paperwork, this is called a protocol. A lot of different protocols are used depending 

on what's needed at the time. Network software and hardware are designed with these protocols, 

in mind you will hear of protocols like Ethernet and TCP which are used for sending and receiving data

you may also hear of protocols like HTTP which is used for accessing the web and SMPT which is 

used for email. Usually several protocols are used together to achieve a task.

## In Summary Notes 

Networks are use to connect devices together 

Devices uses the network to share information 

To share information devices need to speak the same language

This language is called a protocol, which is a set of instructions 
of how to handle the information. 

## Quiz 

**What are two ways computers can connect to the network?**

Computers and other devices can connect to a network using cables or wirelessly. 

WiFi is the common wireless technology for a computer network. **Ethernet is the protocol most often used in cabled networks.**

**What devices do the usually connect to?**

1. Usually cabled devices connect to a **switch**. But, computers can also be connected directly together in some cases, or may connect into a **router**. 
   Sometimes *special* cables are needed, which is covered in the next video.

2. Wireless devices usually connect to a wireless **Access Point (AP)**. Sometimes wireless computers will connect to each other without an **AP**. This is called an **AdHoc network**.

**How many protocols are used when one computer accesses another computer?**

This is a bit if a trick question to get you to think. The answer is, *it depends*.

As we talked about, protocols are a way to format data. This means that both ends of the conversation understand what’s being said.

Some protocols are used to deliver data. They don’t care what the data is about though. Their only job is to get the data from one endpoint to another. **Ethernet**

is an example of this type of protocol.

Other protocols work with the application. An example of this is **SMTP** with is a protocol that describes how emails are handled. 
SMTP doesn’t worry about getting information onto a cable, or across WiFi. That’s what protocols like Ethernet are for. SMTP is only worried about the mail.

So, several protocols may work together to accomplish a task. We’ll see more of this throughout the series.

 
